This repo showcases analysis and modelling based on a project that I completed as part of my MSc. in Data Science. The project goal was to determine the extent to which delayed commercial flight can be predicted using machine learning models. Specifically, a flight is defined as being delayed where it departs more than 15 minutes later that its scheduled departure time, in accordance with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) definition.

There are numerous factors that may cause a flight to be delayed, some of which are more amenable to prediction than others. For example we might hope to be able to predict to some extent the likelihood of weather-related disruption, congestion at a departure airport or delays due to previous flights arriving late based on historical data. On the other hand, delays caused by rarer events such as IT system failures are expected to be less easy to predict. Encouragingly, [FAA data](https://www.faa.gov/nextgen/programs/weather/faq/) suggests that weather and 'volume' (i.e. the total number of flights/passengers) are 2 of the most significant factors at play.

Central to this work is the [On-time Performance dataset](https://www.transtats.bts.gov/ONTIME/) maintained by the US Department of Transport (DOT) Bureau of Transport Statistics. This publicly available dataset provides details of departure and arrival delays (as well as cancellations and diversions) of commercial flights operated by a number of large US airlines. It covers only flights departing and arriving in the US. Each row in the dataset represents a single flight between 2 airports on a given date with an airline and flight number that are unique to the date and airport pair. To reduce the dataset size, a number of fields from the original dataset that were deemed irrelevant to delay prediction have been dropped. Departure and arrival times have also been converted into minutes since midnight. Note also that all times are specified in the local timezone at the relevant airport.